There's another one on this page.
No, the red.
Why would they just pick, like, that one letter on that one page?
Well, they ought to do the—well, they did—it had capitals, you see.
That was practiced.
Most Gutenberg Bibles had that done in other early printed books.
I guess they didn't manage to see the A out there.
You can find another capitalist page and see.
So it would be every capital letter, then?
In theory, it should be every capital letter.
What's your theory about what this publication is?
Well, it's a very important publication.
Well, there's no question about that.
What's my theory about what it is?
Is it in your mind, does it precede
No, it does not, because it's in 1456.
Oh, it's dated.
It's dated there.
Well, he gave it in Rome, and it had to be printed after that date, in 1456, in the calendar of July.
I see.
It would probably be printed that fall, or something, I would guess.
Okay.
No, there's no dollars later than the Bible.
But it's a type that I have a feeling has been lying around for a while.
And there is a pea, for example.
It has something knocked out of it.
There's some dirt, I think, got into the mold.
No, it isn't that one.
There it is.
There.
You see that C up in there?
You can make it like that if you want to.
And there's another pea on this page, I think, and it shows the same thing.
You can get it down close if you want to.
If I can find this to show you that it's not unique.
Yes, here it is, right there.
See?
They're both of them.
They're both made from the same mold, you see.
That is fascinating.
And probably some dirt or sand or something got in the mold and it had been kicked around for a while in the floor.
It's like a little thing there, yeah.
There are two of them on the same page.
You can't say that those are unique.
It had to be in the mold, because they were two on the same page.
Yes, I certainly think two pieces of type, each had that defect.
It must have been in the frame at the same time.
It's sort of interesting, I think.
But this, we're trying to get a facsimile made of this.
If I live long enough, maybe someday it'll come off.
God knows.
I was sweating about it for years.
Or the difficulty, Paul having moved to Southern.
Well, they're always having some difficulty, and Paul won't let anybody else do it.
And so that's the trouble.
And so that makes me kind of sore at times.
You know, the facsimile part has been done by Marian Steiner, and the text is in typescript.
It takes Paul and Hope and Janet a few minutes to get their act together.
This is the most fragile book in the library.
One time I got this one.
And as we speak, I know that's a caxton over there.
That's okay.
The cast in are two.
Well, there's about five, I think, or so.
But this, I got this.
Morgan has a Coptic fragment of acts.
I saw it labeled one time.
Mr. Kraus and I were looking at it.
See, Mr. Morgan went through his hands, naturally, and they called it a complete fragment.
And an oxymoron, isn't it?
And a complete fragment, and it's about 15 chapters or thereabouts, I think, 15 or 15 chapters in a particular fragment.
I said, Hans, how big does a fragment have to be in order to be complete?
One atom?
Does that make a complete fragment?
And booksellers talk, booksellers talk.
So I have it on a distinct authority on the complete fragment.
This, however, is not a, as far as I know, is not a fragment.
It is a complete Gospel of Matthew.
We get nervous the minute he does this.
I'm keeping my hands folded.
This is about the fifth century in Coptic, but it is written in a script that's very like the big Greek codices of that time.
We're describing something that's perhaps four or five inches wide by perhaps six inches, if it's six inches deep.
I think it's more like four or five, yeah.
And you can see the characters there look like, some of them look like Greek capital.
I was going to say Greek.
No, it isn't Greek.
But there certainly is a resemblance.
And a lot of the names are written the same as in Greek.
Do you know any Greek at all?
Not to read, no.
All right.
I'll get to the end of it if I can find that particular page without any explosions.
I hope it will be all right.
This is the most interesting page in the book.
It's right here.
There.
See that?
That's sort of a nice little sign.
And this, now can you see that?
Doesn't that look like an M?
Can you see over my thumb there?
Yes, it does.
Can you imagine an M there, if you want to?
And take my word for it, the letter next to it is an A, if you try hard.
And then this circle with a line to it, that's a theta, which means TH.
There's an A, I, O,
And that C would be used as an S, so that means Matthias, or Matthew, you see.
Matthew.
And before that comes the word K-A-T-A, which is kata, which means according to Matthew.
And this word up here is the word gospel, or evangelion, the evangel, where the word evangelist, all that stuff comes from.
Evangelion, I-O-N, you can see there at the end.
I should say, I suppose.
The Yoda-Omicron knew that, and you see this capital capital, and then at the end it says, these last letters, beginning of this E, airene, which he's speaking about the hippies' greeting of peace.
Airene means peace.
You know, the word irene, and so on, comes from that.
So there are pieces of greeting.
So that is the title at the end.
Can we date this at all?
I said fifth century.
Oh, you did say fifth century.
Yeah.
Gith century.
Probably fifth century.
Now, here comes the early version of the glory.
This is Greek for change.
And that's doxa, means glory, and highest, and it's a story.
Oh, that's the abbreviation of God, and so on.
And then there's peace, again, again, again, again, again.
That's all Greek.
Look at the remarkable wood condition of it.
And it's an unusually early copy of the Gloria, and it has some stuff in it that's later dropped out.
What happens here?
Well, there's a mice, or whatever, I guess.
And then here, when they were talking about doing various things, like glorifying, praising God, and so on, there was something supposed to be put in, this word, which means we sing hymns to thee.
So they were musically as well.
Now, has anyone else read this to the degree that you have?
Much more than I have.
Does this reflect all of your own research into it, I wonder?
No, it's not.
This was published in fact, similarly.
Well, you didn't tell them the story about dropping it.
No, I didn't.
The facsimile came, and I was holding one hand, trying to open this page, and holding the facsimile in the other hand, and the whole thing exploded all over this place here, on the floor and everything else.
And so I had to put the book back together again, me, gathering signs, things like that, you see.
And fortunately, there was a facsimile Krauss had given us.
He'd Xeroxed the whole thing.
And I'd made notes on that.
different signs meant about the gatherings.
And when this fellow who did the facsimile, I mean the book that Bill refers to, came back, I said, would you please look at this and see if I went through it.
I think you've done it all right.
I think it's OK.
What did you feel when that happened?
I was not happy.
Very unhappy.
It's the worst disaster I think had ever happened to my knowledge.
Oh, God.
And that's an item that you purchased, is that right?
Yeah.
Am I hitting the right areas, Bill?
Mm-hmm.
How often do you come in here, sir?
Well, several times a week.
Ideally, every day at the moment, I'd classify for something else.
Would you say this has been your major avocation?
Maybe not even, it's more than an avocation.
I mean, do you play golf?
Do you go fishing?
Do you walk?
No, I don't play.
I'm an ex-golfer.
I like to walk.
I'm just going to wait.
Go ahead, Bill.
Well, that's the one that's funny about this.
It's a Chester D. Manuscript.
And it's a...canons of the... Oh, it's going to be so wonderful.
Yeah, this really is.
Let's give an idea of the period.
I forgot, what is it?
I think it's 10th century.
10th century.
It's a 10th century manuscript.
And it's a collection of church statues in the council.
Apparently, you're bridging the minds of it.
I mean, it's really a remarkable manuscript to have in a private collection.
It's a nice Carolingian hand.
That's the point.
It shows that period.
It's quite a large manuscript.
I mean, large in the size of the format and the length of it, too.
Carolingian manuscripts tend to be shorter, and this is quite remarkable.
How good did you get in this book?
It's actually three.
It looks like four different kinds of ink, doesn't it?
I think it's two different kinds of ink.
I mean, I think those... Those two, definitely.
Yeah.
But that's just, I mean, the quill running out of ink and getting thinner, and then you can dip it in again and rework it.
There may be, that may be a third kind there with those numbers.
It's extraordinary.
So that's about 1,100 years old?
No.
Yes, 1,100 years old.
Can I help you with that?
There's a case that my father had made in 1925, because this particular copy has a original binding, obviously.
It's a very nice binding.
So I think it would.
This is what we call the 42-line Bible, is that right?
Most of it.
I mean, I first bought it.
Yeah.
And then you can see here, these are signs of the evangelists here, and in between them are the Beatles.
You can see the hippies with their guitars.
I don't know what you say.
What are you talking about?
Can't you see them there?
I don't know, which is Jonathan, which is this regal star, or so on about it.
I'm actually touching a Gutenberg Bible.
The original binding, yeah.
The original binding of a Gutenberg Bible.
Did they lock it, do you think?
Well, those things were put on there to keep the—it was supposed to lie flat, and it was to keep the splitters in the wood from gouging the leather.
Pigskin on a board.
In the original.
How many survive in the original bindings, I wonder?
Not very many.
I don't ... a dozen.
I wouldn't think it'd be a dozen.
No, not too many.
This is a nice bindings.
This is the Eaton copies.
College copies.
It's almost similar.
This is the second copy to come to this country.
Really?
Oh, you have the original bill for it.
Well, what did ... It should be right in here, shouldn't it, Bill?
Is it this is in two volumes, right?
Yeah.
Is the other binding identical to this?
It's essentially identical.
So you get pretty good sized margins, you see.
with the original binding.
God, that's extraordinary.
I mean, it's not foxed at all.
There's no... No, no, there's no foxing in this copy.
I can tell you that.
Now, let's see.
If you, um, and you see, nobody has, um, put the red lines through there at all.
The original
This is the original book.
That's written in the hand of writing Henry Stevens, you know, the book dealer in the Henry Stevens of Vermont, the book dealer.
My God, 1873.
Yeah, he writes George Brindley.
Square, London, February 10th, 1873.
Yeah, he's sending his, he's telling George Brindley he's sending this over.
Henry Stevens, it's called the Mazarine Revival.
Yeah, this is a very famous, you should read that.
Pray, ponder for a moment.
Pray, ponder for a moment to fully appreciate the clarity and importance.
I think it's clarity.
Rarity.
Rarity and importance.
That'll help you.
Do you have a Xerox of this?
I can make it.
Would you?
Well, you'd like a Xerox of that, I suppose.
Would you do that for me?
You'd do that?
Mm-hmm.
I should go down to Princeton more often.
This is wonderful.
Now, what is happening?
Oh, that's on the other page.
OK.
Oh, my god.
That's the beginning of a book.
I see it's all over the manuscript there.
Now, they hired people that came in the studios, the shop, to do that, right?
That's right.
We'll get into that a little bit more here.
This is what numery and numbers you have.
All right, now, but the fellow that was doing
It was supposed to put red lines with the capital letters.
It wasn't doing anything about it, you see.
None of them—he hasn't done art.
What's that in there coming through?
Is that the— Well, now that's the middle of a gathering.
And if you— I see it.
You see the sewing there?
I see it.
Wait a minute.
You see down there?
There are threads down there.
I see it.
The string going through there.
And so they put this bellum in there.
to protect the, so the thread, the string won't cut the paper.
Spectacular.
And in the middle of every gathering, that is the case.
Um, and so I'll go along here with, um... This is a rare moment for me, Mr. Scheide.
I mean, I will always remember being in this room with you as we, as we together go through the Gutenberg Biro.
I mean, this is, uh, this is my common experience.
Well, you can have that at Harvard.
No, I don't think it's a very common book.
Well, that's—but if you're Mr. Krause and have a copy, before you sell it, you call and say you'll have the book of books.
Wow.
Anyway.
Just a few look at that.
Now, here's Joshua.
Oh, boy.
Yes, all right.
And still, there's no money.
Now, this fellow—
There are some pages that do have this in another middle of the gathering, that have the red lines with the capital letters, enable us to tell something about the private life of the artist.
In other words, who his girlfriend was.
I don't know if she had red hair, but I'll show you a little bit.
There's Priscilla and Joshua, I believe, yes.
And here's Judges.
Now, Judges starts over here.
Yes.
The designer, they had double indentation there for this P, so you have to make the P fit into that.
Do these pages compare?
Are they basically identical to the other Bibles?
I mean, would the other Bible pretty much have the same kind of design on this page?
Oh, well, I have a facsimile.
You can show it.
Do I see the facsimile?
So they did pretty much follow a script, in other words.
I mean, the artist did.
Oh, no, no, no, the illumination.
Oh, no, the illumination is different very much.
That's really what I was curious about, the illumination.
Well, you can see what the beginning of Judges is in this book.
I thought you meant the invitation.
Oh, no, of course, the print is print.
Yeah, that would tend to be the same, but ... Joshua?
I was wondering if the artist really ...
If they improvised from one to the other.
Well, he probably did his own job.
Chapter six, we're getting closer.
Well, that's Joshua now.
Very nice, though.
Thank you.
Here you really are.
See, that is the same business.
See how different it is?
It is.
It's dramatically different, isn't it?
Of course, yes.
It's a different artist.
So you just had to fill that place there.
That's all you were doing with a P in there.
Who do you think – do you think they were selling the artists as much as they were selling the – See, they're the Beatles again.
Where did you get this Beatles?
Well, you see these guys, these sloppy-looking, hippy types, with these guitars or lutes, as they are.
Do you see them there?
Oh, of course.
All right.
We're talking about minstrels.
Minstrels, right.
All right, the corn.
But what do you want?
Especially 20 or 30 years ago when I first started it.
They're doing quite well.
And a friend of mine said, when will the Beattles come to Seedles?
Beattles, that's right.
No, to Seedles.
To Seedles, right.
When will the Beattles come to Seedles?
This is the only Gutenberg Bible in private hands, I think.
Is that right?
I would say so, yes.
Now, I don't know the Bible well enough to know what comes after the judges.
But you may notice a change here in a minute.
Look at that.
See that?
So all of a sudden it's become red.
Oh, red, yeah.
That's like what you were showing me in the... You see all the redness there?
Uh-huh.
Now, what book do you suppose that is?
Can you read it across the top or not?
I don't know.
Can you read it?
There it is all by itself.
It's there also.
That's a very legible.
Can you read it there?
Incipit of Lieber...
I'm going to let you do it.
I want to hear you do it.
Do you see what that letter is?
Well, it looks like an R, but it's, uh... Yeah, no, I... It was... Ruth.
There's his girlfriend.
She comes to life all of it in a hurry.
Oh.
Well, he wasn't doing a damn thing over there in Judges.
He didn't care anything about that.
He threw him out of court.
But Ruth runs to her.
It was red all over the place.
Isn't that funny?
And at the end, the Ruth stops again.
Does this happen with all the ... all the ... No, just this copy.
Just this one copy.
But he does this and works somewhere else in the book, but there never was such a dramatic way as that spot.
So that's ... You really think that it's ... Well, I put a Freudian interpretation on it.
Why not?
But I wonder why.
I wonder why.
Maybe he was trying for a different effect.
Why did he pick that book?
It's a short book, but there's a rather short book there, the second volume in particular.
It may well be the shortest book in this volume.
Why were some of these on paper and some on vellum?
Were the vellum ones?
More expensive.
So they actually went through this 500-odd years ago, too.
Well, most manuscripts have been written on vellum, and if they're selling them to an archbishop or some big shot like that who's used to having vellum manuscripts, he would think this is a step down.
He wouldn't be interested.
Now, this is a very—quite aside from this.
The attachment of this saw is Ruth.
This is, in some respects, the most interesting page in this copy.
Now, if you look on— Oh, Pauloulos, we're looking at it.
Well, if you look up there, this is manuscript, see?
Explicit liber Ruth.
Okay.
Over here, that's written by somebody.
This is red print.
Insipid prologus and lebrose regulus.
Don't pen the page.
I don't want to pen the page.
The prologue begins in the Book of Kings.
Now, if you look at these two pages very carefully, you may want to come closer if you want to, that there is a little bit, see if you agree with me, this is my assertion,
There's a little more space between these lines and these lines.
They're slightly more crowded.
Can you imagine the truth in that statement or not?
I don't see it myself.
Do you see it, Bill?
Yeah, these are the space between the lines there, between the tops of the ascenders there.
Definitely there, I think.
It looks kind of deeper there, no?
Yeah.
There's a little more space.
Now, if you...
If you count these, you're supposed to get forty-two lines.
If you count these, you're supposed to get forty lines.
But they're the same length, you see.
The columns are the same length.
So, if what I say is right, and I think it is right, there's more space here to the two lines.
Now, to come down to more particulars, take
I want to find a cue over here, for example.
Well, in other words, they cut out two lines.
No, they didn't cut them out.
Well, they didn't cut out, but they spread it out.
They put some leading in there.
Now, I want to find a cue over here, or a queen.
Is there any cue in this pile?
But you'll have to come over and look at it.
Look, there's a cue.
Now, take this cue.
Do you see spikes coming out of the top?
Yes.
How about over there?
Do you see a spike there?
I don't see a spike there.
No.
It's been filed off.
Just for that one line of type, probably.
Well, from all the type.
I'll take, let's see, where's the P here?
I mean, just for that one instance, wouldn't you say?
No, that's where you can see it.
All the type, but in other cases it isn't so clear.
I'm looking for, there's got to be a P over here somewhere.
I know there is, because I've
There's one right there.
A capital P. Yeah, there's Poro, that's it.
See the spike up there?
There's many there.
File down.
Or the other one there on Octavis, but Obed is much smoother.
Can you see how this O in Obed is smoother than the O in Octavis?
I'm just trying to, I'm looking at this to see if it's on line, and it is.
They are both on the same line.
And so this has been thought to have been the original form of the type.
And this was the second press.
So he set up a second press to begin at this point.
And they printed for a while with this forty-line format, and then somebody said,
This is wasting.
You've got to get more type on a page.
Well, they tried hard, and they got two more lines on.
And by filing all the type, I'm going into a lot of trouble.
I'm just going to count the lines.
I can't.
You take the dull end of your pencil and you can.
I hesitate to do that.
All right.
Two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve.
14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36.
You're kind of only one, aren't you?
At the end there, I think.
2, 4, 6, 10, 2, 6, 8, 20, 2, 4, 6, 8, 30, 2, 1, 6, 8,
It's about 40.
That's 40, yeah.
And so they added two more lines.
Yes, they added two more.
And this is how they were doing it, by filing out the top cells, as you can see.
I get it now.
And there you can see them both.
But why is it the beginning, then, is not really the beginning of the book?
Well, yes, I haven't quite finished my story.
And this is the second press.
Now, then it got a little further along, and they said, oh, we're getting a lot more orders.
You've got to print more copies.
And they go, what about the pages that were already printed?
Well, you have to do them over again.
Oh, boy.
So there are two versions of any page that occurs in 40 lines is another version in 42 lines.
And so they had to do that.
Then all these things lay around the print shop, and were all put together this way and that.
pure chance how things work out.
In this particular copy, we got the 40 lines in this section at the beginning of the 42 line.
So that's why I showed you this with a particular project.
My suspicion is that in this copy, this is the oldest page that was printed.
But in any copy you look at, you'll get a mixture of them.
And none of them, I imagine, are identical.
So some have all the 40 lines.
We have the earliest printing in every case.
All we have here is putting in this case, but not in this case.
Are there any proof sheets that survive?
Yes, I think there's one in Bloomington, Indiana, speaking about that.
So if you go to Bloomington, Indiana for any reason, why are you— Well, I'm going to go see John Cagle, as a matter of fact, at the Lilly Library.
Yeah, well, he'll know it.
He'll tell you about it.
And I tried to get it, and Krauss had it almost, well, about in the 50s.
And I wrote, and he's already sold it to Mr. George Cool, who sold his stuff to Indiana.
And I said, well, I'm very disappointed.
They said, well, it's too shy you haven't been buying books lately.
I said, well, you knew I had a good work Bible, did you?
And so I would have been glad to have it myself.
But you see here, you see.
Nothing angers you more when a dealer has something and doesn't tell you something.
Yeah.
See the pithole?
That's a good pithole.
There's a good pithole there.
There's a pithole on almost every page.
Which indicate what?
Well, it was pinned down in the press.
See the pithole there?
You can see there.
That's a very clear pinhole.
They pinned them right down in the press, so they wouldn't wiggle when the thing came down.
I see.
Where do you keep your Declaration of Independence that was in the news recently at the Bradley Martin sale?
You have now the ... They actually named you in that catalog.
I thought you'd be part of the collection.
But that isn't unique.
You see, that's another very common thing.
I was trying to make the thing interesting for you.
But now, as we go along here, all right, now get along to, um, yeah, so when I first came down here, we had to exhibit this thing, and I was trying to figure out, and of course, everybody builds this sort of stuff, and here's another 49 page, and some more of the red printing.
But when they gave up the—they went to 42 lines, they also gave up red printing.
This is the only red—this is the only red printing in this project.
Is there any connection between that?
Do you think there was just— I think so.
It took too much time.
It wastes too much time.
You had to be re-inked and everything.
And it's sort of— Now— Can I just feel this?
I promise I won't .
Wow.
All right.
Well, um— I can actually say I've touched it.
But I was trying to get away from just that kind of thing, because the importance of that book is not that, but this.
So I wanted to find pages where there wasn't anything else to distract anyone's attention.
So I found one over here.
I'll show you.
Now that read, did you say that's manuscript?
Oh, yes, of course.
Absolutely.
Just as much as that is.
You see somebody's putting a C in there to tell the guy what letter's supposed to go there.
And also at the top of the page, you've done the same, and once in a while you can see it.
But now over here, here's one of those pages, see, where there's nothing except that.
So now you've got me looking for pinholes, too, now that you can point it out.
Yes, there's a pinhole.
Well, I think there's a pinhole down there, maybe.
There's that one there.
That's a pinhole.
Now, here you ought to be able to tell what this is about.
Which column should we look in?
We should look in there.
Is that working?
Goliath.
Yeah, so there you see what it's about.
Well, it's David and Goliath, of course.
It must be David here.
But I wonder why Goliath isn't a capital G. Did they capitalize Christian names?
They didn't capitalize this name either, see?
Is that a capital D?
It doesn't look like it to me.
Yeah, but that's the beginning of a sentence.
That's true.
The period?
Yeah, see, Philistius didn't capitalize that either.
Goliath, no money.
So there we are.
So we have long, see?
And a small d for David.
That's wonderful.
That's the first edition of that story.
All right, I'll go on.
And you see, nothing but type.
That's what you're supposed to see.
Now, one of the funny things about this book, I enjoy their hyphens very much.
and the margins are wonderful, I have yet to find a bottom line at the end of a second column that has any hyphenated words never go from page to page.
Which makes sense.
Or column to column.
And how they avoid that is wonderful.
I don't know, but they do.
It's very easy to do, because when you're sitting looking down at a big book like this, or it's easier to look at the bottom line anywhere else,
They're perfectly justified, aren't they?
Oh, yeah.
This is what I call the first team.
And after, all those guys would say, what's going to happen?
This is a success.
Boy, am I getting out here.
Instead of a bone shop, I'm not going to work for these pittance of wages.
I'm going to business myself.
See, I'll get the profits.
So that's what happened.
And right after this, then the survivors had to pick up new apprentices and start over again.
Now, let me see, we want, we want, I think we want third king, if I'm not mistaken.
But now we'll take it, I will, I will, look at this now.
That's extraordinary.
Now, here we sent a, used this on a Christmas card one time.
You did?
Because this is found on playing cards.
We're looking, what kind of an animal is that?
A bear.
Yes, it is a bear.
I had a long bus climbing like a vine.
It's extraordinary how he knows this.
Watch him.
When we first got the team down here, Lehmann Hough, his father, Brittenberger, the master of the playing card, and he saw this thing, and he was very much interested.
He was very excited.
Well, there's a picture of it.
And here is the nine of wild animals.
See?
On the playing card.
It's a bit of kick-massy now, I think.
Well, anyway, we've... It's precisely the same illustration.
But there he's unmotivated.
He goes, well, why are you in that position?
Here you can understand it.
Well, they illustrate a little bit here.
Well, yes.
That's another book.
I don't think that's a playing card.
I don't know what it is.
It gives you the idea of what he's doing there, as opposed to just... But then the playing card, it makes no sense.
So I used this photograph over here, about 1962, as I remember, as a Christmas card.
Will the bear make it to the top?
Did the master of the playing cards make it?
Did Gutenberg make it?
Our prayer for the new year is, may we all make it.
The bear is sort of wondering if he's going to make it.
And this sentence here says, something rather, the Lord was good and the plague was averted from Israel.
And that was just after the Cuban Missile Crisis.
So I thought that was not bad.
Yeah, certainly.
Whether or not the bear makes it to the top.
Now, there's a number of these playing card things show up in this book, beginning at this point.
And the suit of flowers, the playing card, these are from playing cards, and the birds also.
And so it'll go on from this time and enjoy.
They drew these from?
Model books.
I see.
They follow, who would get this?
Must have been lucky to model.
very similar to this fellow that has his playing cards.
And the playing cards are done by some sort of print business, impression.
This is not as drawn.
Like a stamp, maybe.
Yeah, some sort of stamp.
As I noticed, when I looked at it, the Bibliotec Nationale.
And so we'll go to four.
Four kings.
Here is, and here you see, there's a stork.
That's a playing card.
He gets excited about the stork also.
Here's one of these little tabs.
It would have gone right there, I suppose.
It doesn't know where this book was.
This is travel, the book, for all these hundreds of years.
That's right.
Five hundred and some years.
Smile-boggling.
They took really good care of these, didn't they?
Yeah.
This paper is a wonderful rag paper.
I haven't seen a single instance of any suggestion of proxy.
Of course, it doesn't happen 100% in Iraq anyway, does it?
Not so likely, not so likely.
Now we get to Chronicles, see the little green man shooting the deer?
It's the pull of the Chronicles at the end of
I wonder why they left that blank.
No, at the end of the book.
They wanted us to make a big deal with it.
That's why they didn't put a picture down there or something.
I don't have any pictures.
There's the scribe.
Yes, that's exactly what I was talking about.
That's a good example of that.
You see, he wrote up there what this guy was supposed to write.
And there it is.
And then it's supposed to be trimmed off from the binder.
The same way the holes are supposed to be trimmed off from the pinhole.
See, there you can keep it and keep it.
That's the only one I've ever done.
Yeah, that's a good one, yeah.
Every once in a while, one of those will show up.
And there's this owl.
That's also a playing card item.
And you see, there's a little gathering, of course.
And now we'll go along here to end it.
Well, that's a beautiful chronicle.
What is the Second Chronicles?
Coming up with Chronicles.
Second Chronicles is a good one.
I always had this out for the class.
I call it, this gets us in the Ivy League.
This is the
the Dartmouth-Columbia game.
That's cute.
Big Green and the Lions.
Yeah, that's right.
No Tigers, unfortunately.
No Tigers.
We have enough Tigers at Princeton.
Thank you very much.
Is Big Green part of the series?
Is the hunter with the bow and the man with the club, is that part of a playing card?
Oh, yes.
There's a wild man suit.
And, of course, the lion is right there, right
There, see?
It's the exact same line.
Well, it's fairly similar.
Oh, God, look at the ... It suggests it, shall we say.
It's more than it suggests it.
Yes, I think so.
And the flowers also.
So I always have that page out when that class comes in.
Now, what class is this?
Well, 36.
We'll have a reunion next year.
Oh, your classes.
Yeah, my college class.
I thought you meant you were teaching a class.
No, no, college class.
There's a few more.
The nicest thing about these things is they occur right in the middle third of the book.
It's best to open it.
See, now there's another bear.
He said the crawling bear.
The crawling bear, he's, um, there he is.
He came up up there.
Mm-hmm.
Oh, yeah.
That's all.
And the bird.
Well, he's out of stuff, so we used the, uh... Oh, yeah.
It was this blackhead, wasn't he, by the... Well, he was using the model.
And there's something bad down there.
That's the first thing I've seen.
I'd have to say this is a remarkably fine copy, isn't it?
It's a nice copy.
Then finally, is this?
Yeah, that's right.
And then this is the third bear.
The hibernating bear was always stuck in his toe or something.
Are these cards, like, with 52?
I mean, is there a traditional deck of playing cards now?
No, no, but I mean, they certainly were used by a number of, in manuscripts and manuscripts all over the place.
No, this is just two, and there's three.
Now, I think, pretty soon now, this is going to disappear.
The model book will have been withdrawn.
Yeah, so I think it's gone now.
Well, it's a bird.
Yeah, it's a bird, yes.
Is this the same artist throughout, or do you think this is a team of artists?
Are these different artists?
I think it's pretty much the same in this volume, anyway.
Yeah, this is one of the pages that Paul Edom gets so interested in, because there's a lot of numbers, and they write them all out.
And they don't abbreviate this equal.
Well, it's slightly abbreviated.
Queen Quaginta Septem and Centum Quadrigim Quaginta Duo 142.
Look at this one, and yet they still don't have any hyphen at the bottom line, you see.
They must have actually pointed for that from the top of the column.
You'd have to have a word for it.
Yeah, no, no, no, no, Templum Dei, that's it.
Look, they have two hyphenated words right there.
Yeah, yeah.
And yet they set the thing up so they couldn't do it.
Is it hyphenated in the next to the bottom line?
Look, there's one, two, and there are four of them.
Well, that's the final seven lines.
Amazing.
You see, that's a different fellow.
That's a different style.
I would say, yeah.
At the end of the gathering, you see, that's what happened here, I think.
So they have a blank painting.
And I wouldn't call that quite in the same class.
I don't just find that so interesting.
And so, now, there's some more birds there.
Well, find them.
And this is what you're talking about again.
Mm-hmm.
Yep, exactly.
Now, that's Tobit.
Tobias.
Yep.
This is a very busy page.
And this is definitely a different artist as well.
Oh, I'm sure it is.
Yeah.
I would say so.
Now, here's the book.
Now, he's trying to imitate that stork earlier.
Do you remember the stork?
He had a snake in his mouth, the earlier stork.
Yeah.
He didn't have the book in front of it anymore.
There's a bird that he started to draw and didn't finish in one of these places.
Things are sliding downhill now.
It's not the same.
Does the provenance of this book go back?
I mean, do you trace this back to this earlier story?
Some fluke of history.
And the same, look at that, see?
That's right.
It was just a pen sketch, and then suddenly it got called the telephone, forgot all about it.
Because otherwise you'd have had one over here, maybe.
Yes, he might have to balance it after he finished that.
That's a particularly nice thing.
Oh, yeah.
That's the one I was looking for.
Then there was a piece of vandalism, and in the spring of 85,
Well, you see, this is not a complete copy, and I hurried over at the beginning to fill it up, because this first page is a facsimile.
That is not, that was stolen.
From here?
No, it was stolen before even Mr. Henry Stevens had it.
And we were always wondering where these facsimiles came from, because you see, they don't have any red lines through the capitals.
I don't mind it, it wouldn't show up as red, but there are no lines of any color at all through those capitals.
And this is the 42-line version.
See, there are some red lines in there.
And he decided this wasn't Ruth, so he quit for a while.
It was just a preface.
But here, Ruth, there's a reference to Ruth, and there's a little red there, as it were.
But there are other places that have red, too.
Underlined up here.
Underlining over here.
Yeah, Zacharias, yeah.
But this fellow is working a little bit.
So somebody stole a sheet out of this.
It's probably framed in the house someplace right now, right?
Well, I wish I knew where it was.
Of course, he'd like to know then.
He'd try to get as much money as he could for it, and we'd have a problem of bargaining.
But where did this come from?
And we would look at their English copies, and it didn't match at all.
There were a total of 17 leaves that were missing.
This is the only, the other 16er in the second volume looked as though he was stealing random out of the second volume.
And then he grabbed this one, and then when he heard somebody come, he ran.
It was in a little town in East Germany, the airport, which isn't too little anymore, as a matter of fact, in the basement of a church that sat there for 400 years, discovered in the mid-19th century, shortly before that sale.
But in the spring of 85, a fellow came, a German came, named Eberhard Koenig, who had made a study of the illuminations of the copies of this book.
And he took one look at these things, a murie copy.
And so that summer, Marie, yeah, it was that summer, went over there and took some of the extra copies.
My father replaced some of them, and had the original leaves he got hold of, bound in, and so the facsimile leaves are just loose.
And I was able to take a few over there, and he communicated to my guy while he was .
And they had no record over there of anybody ever having done it.
And he said, oh, you've got good early lithographs.
Oh, would you give him one?
He said, no, no, she's not.
There's an interesting early lithography.
So it goes.
But then there's another piece of later, I'm sure it's later vandalism.
It's the beginning of Job that we see right from.
There's always Job.
Maybe that's where the bird was.
It was an unfinished bird at the beginning of Job.
Yes, it was.
Prologus, Libra of Job.
Job itself begins there, I guess.
Okay.
He really liked that train, didn't he?
Yeah.
All right, now we get to pass Job to the Psalms.
Something awful happened.
And he looked back.
He said, this fellow could be looked back.
He said, 19th century.
Just like that.
My God, how do you know?
And so we looked.
Turn the page, and you look down here, do you see the knife?
The knife blade going through there?
Can you see that?
Mm-hmm.
Yes, I can.
Where they cut.
And it goes through the second leaf very slightly there.
Yeah, you can see that very slightly there.
Traces of it.
What happened?
Somebody cut the letter out!
And this has been put back in, and then you look at this thing here, and it's writing.
Yes, that sort of stuff is writing.
And I've compared that with the facsimile of the same place, and you can see it.
You can see it.
I can see it.
It's very good.
It's a fake.
It's very good, though.
Yeah, it's a fake.
And it's been stuck back in there.
So somebody chopped out a letter, or sliced out a letter.
Sliced out whatever was there.
And this inferior artist was, he wanted it.
And then he got it.
And then it repaired before the book was sold.
And it may not have ever, ever been discovered, but Phyllis Fella Kearney came along.
He saw it, huh?
No, he spotted that right and said, that's 19th century.
Isn't that so funny?
That's not a forgery, isn't it?
Right, who would have noticed, you know, the very tear there?
You can see it once you know it's there, you can see it.
It's not all the way through, but it's an indebted cut.
But that's pretty apparent right there.
Oh, yes, you bet, yes.
When you look at it, you can see it very, very clearly.
Absolutely.
And someone's tried very hard to reproduce what he thought ought to be there.
Isn't that funny?
Yeah.
So that's one body.
That's great.
That was really exciting.
Yeah.
And you want to put it back in there?
This is the vault over here, I gather.
This is the treasure vault.
This is a somewhat rarer book than the Bible.
Somewhat rarer, you say?
Oh, yes.
And there is no copy of it in this country.
I'll tell you what to do.
Before you open that thing, you put that away.
There's a facsimile of it.
I shall open it out.
I'm fine with it.